Introduction to Christian Values and Decision-Making in Health Care

Introduction

In terms of spirituality, human nature is a vast, complex, largely unknown world. The inner world of a person is shaky, as it is vulnerable to the influence of other people and circumstances. At the same time, it can become a support in difficult times and lead a person on the right path. Therefore, knowledge of the inner world of a person is no less necessary and important than knowledge of the surrounding reality.

The determination and will to face the obstacles that stand in our way to healing often indicate a genuine desire to heal. However, there are obstacles to recovery for those who are sick and those who pray for them. For example, angry emotions and feelings can provoke illness; if we reinforce them, they become an obstacle to recovery (Dein, 2020). According to Christian readings, such a stage of spiritual development as the desire for healing gives a person a stable meaning of existence.

Furthermore, what you think often affects your physical and emotional state. If you fill your soul with positive thoughts, especially faith, your physical and psychological health will improve, and this will help you see opportunities for interaction with God. Living in harmony between your physical and spiritual health is essential, as they are closely related (Bogue, & Hogan, 2020). Bitterness, unforgiveness, sin, and refusal to do what God asks of you can prevent you from receiving emotional and often physical healing. It does not mean you can magically remove these obstacles yourself, but you can allow the Lord to do this in your heart.

Conclusion

Summing up the above, I want to recall the main psychological regularity: values are imposed from the outside and do not become an internal property of the individual. Therefore, the initiator of spiritual development is the person himself. Waking up in the morning, you can feel the taste of change. You can change your views change your aspirations. Everyday life teaches us and opens our eyes to something.

References

Bogue D.W. & Hogan M. (2020). Practicing Dignity: An Introduction to Christian Values and Decision Making in Health Care. Grand Canyon University. Web.

Dein, S. (2020). Religious healing and mental health. Mental Health, Religion & Culture, 23(8), 657-665. Web.