Health and Social Care Services: Barriers to Working Partnerships

Introduction

Working partnerships are strategic arrangements that comprise two or more institutions to enhance service delivery. The partnerships are becoming common and preferred due to their performance-oriented incentives that include consolidation of resources and collaboration in decision-making. The aspects aid effectiveness, efficiency and creativity in institutions. In particular, working partnerships are common among health organizations in the US. The organizations are collaborating purposely to enhance delivery of quality health and social care services. Despite the noble benefits of the working partnerships between health care providers, there exist numerous barriers or challenges that threaten to erode the gains made through the arrangement. The barriers lead to acute disagreement hence disintegration of the partnerships. This paper gives a comprehensive discussion on the major barriers that affect the sustainability of working partnerships between two health care services and social providers.

According to Coles & Porter (2008), differences in priorities and goals are the first major barriers that impede progress or continuity of working partnerships. The differences influence decision-making processes on the type of medical equipment to purchase, policies to adopt and key health and social care services to focus on optimally. They occur since every partner would advocate for the adoption of its priority proposals and operating goals (Dixey, 2012). Each partner in most circumstances seeks to dominate activities in such arrangements hence creates disunity.

The attitude of professionals also affects the sustainability of working groups. The aspect is a detrimental barrier to the provision of quality health and social care services since it influences the way the staffs attend to patients’ issues. Attitude is a problem since each group in a partnership has employees with a distinct cultural background and understanding that shape the way they relate to others (Glasby & Peck, 2003). The differences in attitude have led to severe disagreements between employees of the partnering institutions and employees in the management.

Similarly, the incompatible system of storing and sharing data is a problem that has fueled the disintegration of many partnership agreements in the health sector where data management and sharing is paramount. The problem occurs especially when the two partnering institutions have different sets of systems in terms of functionality, quality, usage and maintenance protocols (Kabene, 2011). The differences normally degenerate to acquisition and counter-accusations between the partners leading to separation.

Lack of resources and poor management also affects partnership arrangements in the health sector. Deficiency of resources impedes the fulfillment of the growing expectations of stakeholders that become complex to achieve (Nelson, 2015). The impact is evident since lack of funds hinders purchasing of more drugs, medical equipment such as diagnostic machines, and hiring of staff members. It creates tension hence leads to separation. Many health care officials indicate that poor management strategies also affect the sustainable operation of partners in the health sector (O’mullane, 2013). Working partnerships that are managed through autocratic leadership style create grounds for resistance to instructions hence lead to separation. In addition, lack of understanding and poor systems of accountability advance disagreements in working partnerships. They create a high level of disquiet and trust issues that impede quality service delivery.

Ways to improve or mitigate the barriers

To address the effects of the barriers in the health sector, it is prudent for the partnering institutions to harmonize their priorities, develop favorable operating policy guidelines and set coherent goals. In particular, the management of the partnership arrangement should empower the staff through training for them to understand their roles and the objectives of the arrangement. The empowerment is necessary to avert conflict of interest and attitudinal disorders among employees (Taillieu, 2001). Likewise, an effective monitoring and review system are necessary to promote identification of the existing weaknesses, accountability and involvement of employees in the delivery of quality services. Hiring more skilled staff members and access to the requisite resources is another strategy that holds the capacity of providing a viable solution to the problem. It would help in addressing the staff deficiency and lack of equipment that compromises quality service delivery (Capewell et al, 2012). These factors including effective information sharing would help in promoting sustainable partnership arrangement in various settings. Therefore, the institutions should embrace them to achieve the expected results.

Conclusion

Indeed, the evident barriers can be solved through the adoption of effective communication systems, mobilization of sufficient funding, formulation of a solid legal framework and empowerment of the employees. For instance, effective communication systems would help in mitigating the effects of the barriers by promoting sharing of information and management of data. The strategy helps in averting confusion since it ensures that every stakeholder is versed with pertinent information about daily responsibilities. Similarly, enough funding helps partnership arrangements to stabilize, as they can acquire necessary equipment, hire skilled staff and procure relevant drugs for purposes of advancing quality service delivery. Sufficient funds can be attained through loan borrowings, donations, and financial aid from donors. Effective policy framework on what is expected from the stakeholders and primary tasks to be executed are essential for the realization of accountability including a collaborative approach to decision-making.

List of References

Coles, L & Porter, E 2008, Public health skills a practical guide for nurses and public health practitioners, Oxford, Blackwell.

Capewell, S, Moonan, M, Orton, L, Lloyd-Williams, F & Taylor-Robinson, D 2012, ‘Barriers to Partnership Working in Public Health: A Qualitative Study’. PLoS ONE 7.1, Web.

Dixey, R 2012, Health Promotion: Global Principles and Practice, Wallingford, Oxfordshire, CABI.

Glasby, J & Peck, E 2003, Care trusts: Partnership Working in Action, Abingdon, Radcliffe Medical.

Kabene, S 2011, Human Resources in Healthcare, Health Informatics and Healthcare Systems, Hershey, PA, Medical Information Science Reference.

Nelson, B 2015, Essential clinical global health, Leuven [u.a.], Garant.

O’mullane, M 2013, Integrating Health Impact Assessment with the Policy Process: Lessons and Experiences from Around the World, Wallingford, Oxfordshire, CABI.

Taillieu, T 2001, Collaborative Strategies and Multi-Organizational Partnerships, Leuven [u.a.], Garant.