People and Culture in English-Speaking Countries

In addition to being the most widely used language in the world, English is widely spoken as a native language around the globe. The English-speaking culture is extremely influential all over the world and the English language is indeed the main tool of world communication. The English language itself can vary significantly depending on the peculiarities of pronunciation and dialect. Often there are cases when residents of two different countries do not understand each other due to the fact that they speak different versions of the English language. There is a well-known example in the United States when TV channels broadcasting British sitcoms provide them with subtitles so that the American audience can understand what the actors with a pronounced British accent are talking about. However, it should be remembered that English-speaking peoples live in countries with their own unique cultural characteristics.

It is not only dialects that differ but also the cultures of English-speaking countries. American culture, for example, is distinguished by a mixture of progressive and conservative morals, the value of individuality and respect for another person’s personal property and boundaries. British culture in the modern sense, is most often associated with unusual eccentric humor, honed tact and etiquette, as well as strict adherence to traditions (Fox, 2017). Other parts of the British Isles are filled with original independent cultures with their own official languages; among these peoples are the Irish, Scots, Cornish, and Welsh. Of the exotic countries of the Caribbean islands where they speak primarily English, the state of Jamaica deserves special attention. It is a country full of political controversy and civic upheaval but with a deeply spiritual and mesmerizing culture expressed in reggae music. Many other countries, such as Canada, Australia, or African Liberia, also deserve attention, which only confirms how countries with one language can differ greatly in culture, political system, and mentality.

Reference

Fox, K. (2017). Watching the English: The hidden rules of English behavior. Hodder and Stoughton.

